It took me some time to realize, but [the rant about turning
25](/A_Quarter_of_a_Century.html) that I posted last week marks my 100th blog
post. I’m never one to pass up an opportunity to celebrate a meaningless
milestone, and although I’m sure you’d much rather read something about Lisp,
Carp, programming languages, or anything technical really, I’ve decided to
bother you with this celebration as well.

Firstly, let me rave a little bit about these past one and a half years. It’s
been exciting seeing my audience grow to people I haven’t met, and hearing that
people actually derive value from me writing about a topic. It’s certainly also
been scary, but I’m usually okay with speaking in front of an audience, and
blogging really doesn’t feel that different to me.

It has been heartwarming to have people who I’ve never met before come up to me
at a social event and tell me that they like my writing. I’ve even been hugged
once!

I also enjoy the things people value. My technical blog posts are often received
in a more lukewarm manner, and that’s alright. If it doesn’t concern you in your
every day life as a programmer, it can be hard to get excited about some random
intricacy of a tool you’ve never used.

In reality, there are only four aspects that people have expressed excitement
about in the past, two of them technical, and two of them decidedly
non-technical. They are:

- The fact that I show my vulnerability in some of my blog posts. This kind of
  honest bit of humanity seems to draw more people to my writing than any of the
  other factors combined<sup><a href="#1">1</a></sup>.

- My [Koala and Turtle](/koala-and-turtle/) stories. I often wonder whether I
  should post more of these, or whether the more technically-minded readers of
  my blog would feel left behind. It’s great to know that there are a number of
  people who I’d describe as “technically-minded”, who seem to enjoy these
  stories a lot.

- My blog posts on Carp. People seem to want to know more about the language,
  and for the time being, my blog posts are probably the best documentation we
  have. This should change soon, though (but I’ve been saying that for a while
  now).

- My series on Lisp macros. This is a very niche topic, and there is only a
  small number of people who are actually interested in the posts, but the
  people who do read them have been very excited, and it’s been enough to make
  me want to continue writing these.

Something that’s interesting about this is that I don’t have a good idea what
people actually care about. I don’t run Google Analytics on this blog post, or
really any analytics for that matter. I don’t want to do that, because I want
you to be able to feel just as vulnerable reading my blog posts as I am writing
them, and I don’t want you to think that you’re behavior is being monitored.
It’s just you, and a little note left behind by me.

But, marking the 100th blog post, I’d like to invite you to [email
me](mailto:veit@veitheller.de) if you want to give me feedback on my blog, or if
you want my opinion on anything, or if you just want to chat. I’ll also remind
you of something that I wrote about a while ago: this blog has [an issue
tracker](https://github.com/hellerve/blog/issues/). If you want me to write
about something, or fix something, or reach out, you can use that as well, as an
open forum. Do keep in mind that others can read these as well, so if you have
more private things to discuss, e-mailing me is probably better. If you’re
privacy-minded, my PGP public key can be found
[here](https://veitheller.de/static/pubkey.asc) and should also be available on
the keyservers.

And lastly, I currently live in Berlin, and if you’d like to go out for coffee,
beers, a meal, or an all-night rave in an abandoned industrial complex, you can
reach out as well!

#### Footnotes

<span id="1">1.</span> I’m very happy that this is the case, because whenever
  I publish a blog post I feel exposed. When people tell me that they
  understand, feel the same way, or even that they’re grateful that I talk about
  it, I feel not only less exposed, but also that showing my vulnerabilities is
  useful.
