I’ve been procrastinating. Don’t get me wrong, I’ve had a fairly productive
couple of days: I solved all of [Advent of Code](http://adventofcode.com/) thus
far, either in [Carp](http://blog.veitheller.de/Carp.html) or
[zepto](https://github.com/zepto-lang/zepto); I contributed a few things to
Carp; I wrote a [snake clone in it](https://github.com/hellerve/reptile); I
produced an unusually torrentous amount of [art](https://veitheller.de/art);
and I’ve been more active on this blog than I have been for a long time.

But I haven’t made any progress on what I’ve set out to do: make a ring. I wnat
to explore why that is in this blog post, for I think it’s a fairly common
phenomenon in the projects I’m working on, and it’s entirely unhealthy, both
for me and for the projects themselves.

## The fear is real

I’m an angsty person. Regular readers of my blog will know, I’ve always been
upfront with it. I’m lucky enough to have a readership that either enjoys
reading those posts or doesn’t care and just waits it out until I write about
Lisp and C and weird hacks again. I’m also lucky enough to not having to
monetize this blog, and so I can just write what I want, and if people enjoy
it, that’s great, and if not, no hard feelings.

This is not true for a lot of other projects I’m working on: people depend on
them, or they pay me to work on them, or, most recently, it is a token that our
primitive cultures require for a bond. I’ve been assured that it’s not a
problem if I don’t get this ring done, but my conscience cannot be fooled by
even the most masterful sleight of hand.

![](https://veitheller.de/static/square.png)

I regularly abandon projects; they pile up behind me, not unlike lost lovers or
estranged friends. My code is very close to me, they feel closer than some of
my human relationships: when I leave them behind, it’s always a goodbye.

That’s utterly unprofessional, and yet I cannot help it but think of the things
I have begun and not finished, like I think of people I know from high school,
asking myself what they’re up to now. The only difference is, for the code I
know the answer; it’s still in the dark, damp cell I left it in, slowly
bitrotting.

I really wish this was more of a hyperbole. I really wish that I didn’t feel
this way in my dark moments, because I not only feel like a failure, I feel
disgustingly treacherous, a tech-savvy snakeoil salesman.

![](https://veitheller.de/static/letter_to_mother.png)

And so I present these little visual distractions instead, in an effort to make
this seem like I’m being productive. This is what I do: if there is a project I
really have to finish, chances are that I won’t finish it properly. I’m too
afraid of not getting it done, and I’m appalled by the manual work, the trial
and error required to _really_ get it to work.

Right now I should be trying to get the 3D printer to work, to print some
sketches, and then generate a good 3D model that my fiancée and I can wear to
see whether what I did was a colossal failure. Instead I’m telling you about
my angst, making you complicit in this game of procrastination. How does that
make you feel?

![](https://veitheller.de/static/ferris.png)

I’m annoyed at how manual 3D printing seems, how much of it is just wait and
see and recalibrate. I could rant about that, but that’s really not what it’s
about: it’s about my inability to do anything that isn’t fun. That’s not
healthy, and it is only getting worse. As my career progresses, and I’m slowly
getting a reputation, and I’m building projects, I more and more get to pick
and choose and I lose my ability to bear anything.

(If a recruiter happens to read this: this is what you’re trying to sell your
clients. Better stay back.)

My parents didn’t spoil me, and I didn’t have a lot of money until I started
working in tech. Now that I do, I can feel it corrupting me. But this is a
story for another day.

![](/assets/parallel.png)

There is so much here that I could talk about more, and I want to talk about
none of it.

So now for the happy ending: I’m still fairly happy with my output, and I’m
learning to live with my conscience. But this is what I think in my darkest
hours, and in a spectacular case of bad judgement I decided to make it public.
You’ve probably read my stuff, you know how I am. Don’t worry, I’ll be fine.
