Every once in a while I get asked what attending the [Recurse
Center](https://www.recurse.com/) is like, either because people read about it 
on my blog or it comes up in conversation with my programming-affiliated friends. 
I always speak very highly of it, and often people are very excited about the
idea, but invariably the question of time and money comes up. Most people would
like to commit to a full batch of 12 weeks to get into the right headspace for
creative exploration—six or single-week batches feel much more constrained,
which can lead to productivity, but also make it harder to enjoy the freedom of
doing what you want.

In this blog post I want to address some of the practical aspects of attending
the Recurse Center. Some very useful information can be found on the internal
wiki, but it is only open to you once you have already been admitted, so it
doesn’t really help clear up any doubts you may have beforehand.

I also want to share some financial and tax advice that is especially
interesting for Germans like me, because it can truly make a difference.

All of this information is based on personal experience, and probably not all of
it is generally applicable.

## Finding the time

Many Recursers are between jobs or even quit their jobs to be able to come to
the Recurse Center. This is especially true for 12-week batchlings. It wasn’t,
however, true for me, although I attended RC for 12 weeks as well. I have a
pretty good relationship with my company, and we’re small enough to plan
together, so I was able to throw the idea at my boss and ask him whether he’d
be open to let me go on unpaid leave for three months, and, if so, when
might be a good time. He was open to it, and in fact very excited about the
idea! Chances are that you can talk to your boss as well, especially if you 
don't work in a very big company. This was important for me, because it removed
at least some of the uncertainty of moving halfway across the world for three
months for some me-time. It also meant that I didn’t have to go through the
hassle of going on unemployment, which meant dealing with German bureaucracy and
my insurance and employee benefits were not going to have to take a
hit<sup><a href="#1">1</a></sup>.

If you are not as fortunate, you might want to think about spending some time at
RC between jobs. It might help you figure out what you want to do next, and RC
offers excellent recruiting services, which I can report both as an applicant
interviewing through RC and as an employer hiring from them!

I will not tell you to quit your job to go, of course. RC was one of the most
transformative experiences that I had in my life as a developer, but it might not
be worth giving up your livelihood for, even temporarily.

## Financial advice

Before we dive into the financials I’d like to express that I’m by no means an
accountant. I’m not even particularly good with money. So you might take all of
my advice with the appropriate amount of salt.

### Budget

First of all, you need to determine what your budget is. I paid about $4,500 in
rent for a three month lease (one bedroom, shared living space with roommates).
For NYC standards, I understand that that’s neither terribly cheap nor
expensive. In my search I optimized for a short commute (RC has since moved
locations), and ended up commuting about 17 minutes door-to-door, which was
pretty great. It’s more than twice what I spend on my nice flat in Berlin,
though, for about a fourth of the room, and I expect most international people
might be intimidated by that number.

I also wanted to optimize for being productive most often, which meant that I
had to set aside enough money to not have to worry about it. All in all, that
meant that I budgeted around $10,000, which turned out to be pretty accurate.
But, as with time budgets, my spending seems to always fill up however much I
allocate, so I could’ve been able to sustain myself on much less than that. I
wanted to enjoy myself, though, and so I erred on the side of having a little
too much money set aside. Just keep in mind that if you are not able to invest
that kind of money in what essentially ended up feeling like a three-month
vacation in the time leading up to my actual batch, you can live on a much
tighter budget. The Recurse Center wiki has a lot of information on good food
options, and you could aim for a daily budget of $12-16, which would amount to
$1100-1500 over three months.

Another important expense that you shouldn’t forget budgeting for is the MTA
subway pass. The monthly pass costs $121, which means that you’ll probably spend
at least $364 on that as well.

There are also a few social outings at RC, some of which include food and drinks
provided by RC, some of which are bring-your-own-stuff. Depending on your
preferred level of liquid libations, this can be quite costly. Bars are usually
at least twice as expensive as in Berlin, for instance, and grocery store beer
can easily be three to four times as expensive. The same is true for cigarettes,
which I have an unfortunate habit of smoking. They are a staggering $13-17 per
pack in NYC, and don’t even come in hand-chiseled packaging.

The bottom line is that if you are on a tighter budget, you might need to look
at your lifestyle and habits and see what you can do to minimize hidden costs.
I was lucky enough to not have to do that, though, and won’t tell you what to do.
If you have a more generous budget, you might want to think about what’s
important to you: do you want a short commute? Close to any particular landmark?
Do you want to live in Manhattan, Brooklyn, New Jersey, or elsewhere? And are
you interested in trying out some of the best restaurants that the city has to
offer, some of which might be expensive<sup><a href="#2">2</a></sup>, or do you
prefer homecooked meals?

### Bonus: advice for Germans

I have a bit of extra advice for my German readers who are interested in going
to RC: there might be some tax-related info that I have that makes you budget
unexpectedly higher.

If you don’t cancel your lease back home, you are essentially paying for two
households—in tax lingo, “doppelte Haushaltsführung”. If you ask nicely after
attending RC, the faculty will sign a letter saying you attended RC, together
with a little blurb about what RC is and is not. My accountant argued that this
was a business-related expense, because it is beneficial to my career as a
programmer, and I essentially got refunded my entire three months of rent when I
declared my taxes for that year. That means that it took almost 1.5 years to get
that money back, of course, but it does mean that it’s not completely gone! This
took me by surprise and is worth considering when planning your budget.

## The social & cultural

In the last 1.5 years, I got much better at interacting with people both in
professional and private settings, partly because of my international friends
and relatives, partly because of work. Back when I first attended RC, I was very
awkward. I had this feeling of being trapped in a social [uncanny
valley](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncanny_valley)—the US functions mostly
the same as Germany culture-wise, but sometimes just different enough that
there was some friction that was hard for the foreign person. One of
the best decisions I made was to [write about
it](https://blog.veitheller.de/Awkwardness.html), as open and as vulnerable as
I dared to be. The reception was unequivocally positive, and a lot of
international people shared similar feelings. It felt great to know that I
wasn’t alone. Chances are that you’ll be very nervous for quite some time in the
beginning. There are a lot of new people around you, some of whom you might
already know and admire. I felt out of place at times, and like I didn’t belong.
But after a while I was able to relax more, met nice people, connected with
them, and almost exclusively had positive interactions.

What I want to say is this: depending on where you're coming from, there might
be a bit of a cultural gap, but you’re not the only person from another country,
and certainly not the only person who is overwhelmed by NYC. Admitting that you
feel overwhelmed might help a lot.

There is also a voluntary, Recurser-led event called Feelings Checkins where you
will be able to talk about your feelings with other people and listen to theirs.
I’ve never attended, but I feel like that would be a great place to start being
vulnerable while still not being quite as public about it as I decided to be, a
good middleground.

## Fin

It’s been almost one and a half years since I never graduated from
RC<sup><a href="#3">3</a></sup>. In a way, this blog post comes a little late,
but then again I was at least able to give that extra bit of tax advice!

I hope this blog post helps you figure out how to make it possible for you to
attend RC or that it prompts you to reflect about how you managed to organize
your batch. I’d love for more articles like this one to appear, so that
prospective Recursers can figure out what strategies work for planning for RC,
what to watch out for, and what to know beforehand.

See you soon!

#### Footnotes

<span id="1">1.</span> While we’re at it, you might want to think about getting
                       international insurance for the time if you don’t already
                       have that, especially as a German. We have a big culture
                       around insurance, and it got rid of even more doubts and
                       fears for me. Talk to your insurance company and see
                       what’s available for you. Health insurance is especially
                       important, in the hopefully unlikely event that you
                       might require medical assistance during your time at RC.

<span id="2">2.</span> I was fortunate enough to be able to try some good
                       restaurants in NYC, and only a fraction of them were of
                       the more expensive variety. That being said, I also did
                       not have to shy away from spending more money when I
                       wanted.

<span id="3">3.</span> Never Graduating is a play on words about RC culture, it
                       doesn’t mean that I dropped out (which is what I assumed
                       when I first read it in the wild).
