There is one piece of advice that you get a lot when you go through the German
school and university system, and it happens to be very bad. So bad, in fact,
that I don’t even think the title of this blog post is clickbait.

“Eliminate ‘I think’ or ‘I’m pretty sure’ from your vocabulary. Either you know
it or you don’t. Project confidence.”

I have a tendency to overqualify things because I’m acutely aware when I’m not
completely certain something is true. My wife is the same way. Throughout our
schooling in Germany, this advice is be given to us over and over
again<sup><a href="#1">1</a></sup>, despite the fact that it is, in my opinion,
really bad advice. There is exactly one situation where it might be useful: in
an exam, when you need to bullshit your way through a question. Weasel-y
language will make you seem more suspicious, so you take the plunge and say
whatever you kinda sorta know with the most confidence and hope it goes well.

Is that a good strategy anywhere else, in industry or acaedmia? Is it somehow
problematic to admit that you do not, in fact, know all there is to know in the
field, or even in your area of expertise? I would argue that this is only
important when your ego is out of control. Take a deep breath. Say it with me.
“I don’t know, let me look it up for you.”

Don’t get me wrong, sometimes you need to trust what you know, even if you
don’t know whether you know it. When you’re defusing a bomb or operating on
another human’s heart, you might need to have faith in your ability. These
kinds of scenarios rarely happen with other people, though. In fact, I can’t
think of one non-combative situation where you don’t have the time to think,
or to look something up real quick. They might exist, but they don’t make up
the bulk of my time.

I’m a consultant. If you wanted to break my job down in an inaccurate, somewhat
mean way that most people happen to agree with, you could say that I tell
other people what to do for a living. Some consultants have a fear of
admitting they’re wrong or they don’t know something, and some are used to
bullshitting their customers when in doubt. When I first started to work as an
external actor, I had to learn that just because people hired an expert that
doesn’t mean they expect them to know everything. Take a deep breath. Say it
with me. “Let me get back to you on this.”

My wife works in healthcare. I have never interacted with that business, but as
a patient and partner of someone who works there, and I don’t want to make any
sweeping indictments. I know, however, that some of the doctors she
encounters—and, I would argue, some of the doctors each of us encounter in our
lives—are so used to tell people what they think confidently that they cannot
ever not be sure about something externally, even if internally they might not
be so sure. It’s not necessarily their fault: we are used to doctors knowing
what’s up right away. We project knowledge onto them, and they have to own
it<sup><a href="#2">2</a></sup>.

I think this advice comes from a good place: trust yourself more! You know this
stuff! But that’s not what you’re actually telling people to do. People choose
to say “I think” or “I’m pretty sure” very deliberately: they’re not 100% sure.
That doesn’t mean they don’t know, it just means that they’re prepared to be
wrong, which is a good thing.

I had to unlearn bullshit confidence. At its best, it’s a life hack to make
people think you’re smarter than you are. At its worst, it’s a codified
component of toxic masculinity. Making yourself vulnerable by saying you don’t
know is not an invitation to belittle you. You’re not going seem like less of
an expert. In my experience, it goes one of two ways: either people do not
even notice, or they appreciate your honesty.

Long story short: if someone tells you that you need to seem more confident in
your answer, tell them “no, thanks”.

#### Footnotes

<span id="1">1.</span> Sometimes our admission of uncertainty would even cost
us grade points.

<span id="2">2.</span> Some might argue that this is a similar dilemma that
consultants face. I don’t actually think so. I think there is one important
difference: consultants project this image of “the all-knowing expert” onto
themselves, engineering their own downfall (or becoming a guru, which is
arguably even worse for everyone involved).
